## Data Science in a Pandemic

In the wake of a global pandemic, misinformation spreads nearly as quickly as the virus itself. Seemingly random outbreaks and a climbing death toll further the chaos felt by billions of people around the world. With halfhearted promises of a vaccine echoed on every news outlet, data scientists have geared up with lab coats of their own to join the fight against COVID-19. Fueled by a yearning for a return to normalcy, knowledge generated through population modeling and other applications of machine learning have saved millions of lives during this global pandemic.<br/>

In agent-based modeling, the movement of entities such as humans, animals, and vehicles are modeled using precise geospatial data. Within the context of modeling a pandemic, this begs the question: how do we monitor the movement of something completely invisible? Unlike the entities mentioned above, collecting data on the coronavirus has not been merely as simple as monitoring intersections for traffic or relying on tracker tags on animals. This difficulty presses one to think more creatively about the manners in which virus ‘travel’ can be measured. To apply similar data and models typically used in agent-based modeling, we can think of the virus as agents and their human hosts as a ‘transportation system’. As people travel, infection spreads from person to person and we observe the spread of the corona virus as a form of ‘travel’ of the virus. Behind the adept models that are capable of modeling such trends, are data which inform the accuracy and applicability of the information they generate.<br/>

Although many sources of data have been used in the numerous algorithms developed and employed by the World Health Organization, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, and other notable organizations, the Covidwise data collection service of Virginia has asserted itself as a new, higher standard of data collection. Released in August of 2020 by the Virginia Department of Health, Covidwise collects real-time spatial and virus transmission data through a cellphone app. The app works by continually retrieving the time and spatial coordinates of the phone, which are relayed back to a growing dataset. In cooperation with local medical facilities and users alike, prevalence data is also available. In conjunction, these data (spatial, time, and prevalence) are linked to determine the various, precise locations of infected individuals. By linking these continuously collected coordinates, the travel of infected individuals, both prior to and after infection, can be modeled. Since each point is time-stamped, app users whose coordinates intersected this path of travel can be alerted to a potential exposure. Virginians, however, have expressed concern for their privacy rights, the app is able to extract relevant spatial data and time while mitigating the risk of usurping personal information. By anonymously and uniquely tokenizing batches of information from each phone every 10-20 min, the privacy of users is constantly maintained. Although this form of data collection faces technological, accessibility, and ethical challenges, it promises to be of great use in a technology-driven world.<br/>

Data collected from Covidwise does prevent some benefits, however, it is largely inaccessible and inapplicable to other populations in different states, regions, and countries. For this reason, gravity models were are a primary tool in predicting the initial spread of COVID-19, which are used to model population volume and flow by relying on aggregated population data at the individual level. Gravity models are commonly used to gauge the use and effectiveness of existing infrastructure because of their ability to make highly accurate projections of population movement, even when smaller data samples are provided. Because population data is more difficult to collect during the dangerous and financially strenuous time of a pandemic, existing population models of population flow and infrastructure use were used to predict the early spread of the virus. By observing the volume of individuals in given areas, their travel, and potential interactions with other population clusters, patterns of virus transmission were extrapolated, and high-risk areas were identified. For example, if we observe high traffic between cities A and B, infection in one population will likely lead to increased cases in the other, meaning populations that have higher through-traffic will likely experience higher prevalence rates of the virus. One poignant example of this observation is in New York city; because of the high volumes of population flow through this small city, New York quickly became the epicenter of the pandemic in the United States.<br/>

Although useful, there are other methods of population modeling that have served to advance our knowledge of disease transmission during the COVID-19 pandemic. Gravity models have predominantly been used to predict patterns of infection, which leaves many questions about transmission itself unanswered. For example, metrics such as the average number of individuals infected by one host remains unknown. To combat this startling lack of knowledge and the fear it inspires, compartmental models (or SIR models) have begun to reveal patterns of interaction between humans and the coronavirus. In my experience with them, through a differential equations class, SIR models are particularly useful because of their ability to account for both independent changes within a population and changes that occur as a result of interactions within subpopulations (these subpopulations represent susceptible, infected, and recovered individuals). Changes observed within a modeled population, by introducing infected individuals, can then be aggregated to a larger scale using data from an OD flow matrix, created using spatial data. In other words, this model also accounts for migration within the population in determining the changes in modeled virus prevalence. These models not only generate useful visuals and information for the public but also allow researchers to model ‘alternate scenarios’ and future changes in infrastructure and public policy that may impact the spread of the virus.<br/>

Evidently, population models such as these have touched the lives of billions of people. This increase in knowledge has allowed researchers to understand how viruses spread and provided the public with the necessary information to stay safe during these increasingly dangerous times. By enhancing our understanding of this virus, of human interactions, the use of current infrastructure and modes of transportation, and the general interconnectedness of society, the world has become better prepared the future outbreaks we may face.  The gravity of these advances in technology is made clear when considering the impact of the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic, which claimed the lives of 500 million people. COVID-19 has been declared more virulent and deadly then the Spanish flu, yet the death toll is 1.3 million people. Although this is in part attributed to advances in medical care, the profound impact of data science and other developments in technology cannot be discounted and will continue to revolutionize our understanding of health and safety.
